Let's make sure it's starting.
I always have to check it.
There it is.
Welcome to Penelope Fitzgerald.
Well, thank you so much for agreeing to see us here on a Sunday afternoon.
Well, you're welcome.
Sorry it's such wretched weather.
It's quite nice, actually.
It's spring already.
We were noticing the beautiful flowers on the way up.
Tell us a little bit about Highgate.
You've lived here quite a
a good deal of your life, I believe.
No, no, I haven't, no, no.
I came here when my son-in-law and daughter got this house, and they then, this bit was actually, I think it was a garage, or it may have been a coach house, because it's older than it looks, it's house.
And he made it into this little plant.
I have to say, you have caused quite a sensation in the United States.
Richard Eater believes that you're the greatest living English novelist.
Well, they can't say fair enough, can they?
And Richard Eater is one of our great critics.
He's a Pulitzer Prize-winning critic.
Yeah.
It's a remarkable tribute.
Well, I'm very grateful to him.
He's a Boston man.
Yes, he is.
Some of the pieces that have been written about you suggest that you've heard the phrase late bloomer, of course, in terms of, I guess your first novel was published when you were 60 years old.
Yeah, that's quite right.
I never was a young novelist.
I rather, I missed that really, because I think it would be great to be a young writer, but no, I wasn't.
Can you explain how it was at that point in your life you turned to fiction?
I'm sorry, I'm just trying to think what did happen.
I didn't start with fiction, I started with biography.
And I started to write really because I got to a point in my life when my husband was very ill, he in fact died shortly afterwards, and I needed some money.
And there were only two ways that I could earn money really, and that was teaching.
And writing, I mean most people have got quite a few things they can turn to, you know, if need be, but I haven't really.
And so I did start teaching and I also began writing.
I'm trying to think why I started with Bern-Jones, but anyway, you don't really want to know about the biography.
Well, actually I do, because when I said at this point in your life you turned a fiction, I do know that you did several biographies.
One, a group biography, in fact, of your uncles and your father, and Bern-Jones as well.
Yeah, well, I started with Bern-Jones, with the painter.
And my grandfather was Bishop of Birmingham.
And that too is where Berne Jones came from.
And he did the wonderful West Windows in Birmingham Cathedral.
Have you ever been to Birmingham?
No.
Well, actually, they're all being covered now with wire because people are so dreadful now.
They throw stones and things when they see a window.
That's terrible.
So they've had to cover it with, I don't know what it is exactly, but anyway, it spores really the window.
But anyway, I knew it.
I'd known it all my life and I've always loved that window.
And so I started to do this, this life of Burne Jones.
After that I did a novel, which was supposed to be a thriller, but as a matter of fact it's not, the publisher thought it wasn't thrilling enough, so it was called a mystery story that doesn't imply any thrills, you know.
That was The Golden Child.
That was right.
He cut out the last eight chapters, this publisher.
I was very fond of him, but he said, oh, people don't want to read these long books.
And so the last eight chapters are gone, and I think it makes it, but there are some ends left hanging in there as a result.
But, you know, my husband, as I said, he was very ill, and I wanted to write something that would amuse him.
Like all many, really, and he read...
be detected in the mystery stories, left themselves, I think.
That's what men do, even.
It did abuse him, you know, so.
It seems very old-fashioned now, but there you are.
That was the first.
Did you start with the character on that, or the mystery?
No, that was actually, we had an exhibition of King Tutankhamen, you know, the treasures from the
and they were in the British Museum, and it wasn't very well managed, in fact, very poorly, and there was a terrible queue outside, you know, people standing patiently night and day waiting, and that made me, that started it off for me.
And when you got into the exhibition, the night was very low, and
There's so much show, you really had to peer at the exhibits, and I thought, well, why have they put the lights so low?
And I thought, well, maybe these things are not genuine, and they've had to keep the lights down.
Because for an exhibition, normally you get a highlight.
And so, you know, I thought, I thought of writing this mystery story.
Well, it turns out, I understand this, but it turns out cryptology or the...
Yes, yes, it did, yes.
And this comes from your background, I think.
Well, one of my uncles was, I suppose cryptologist is right.
Anyway, he was, that's what he did.
He deciphered things.
That's what he did during both the World Wars, the 1st and 2nd.
He worked both at the Admiralty, actually.
It was very successful, actually, as a code-breaker.
And you turned that into a mystery novel.
Well, I didn't... I should have pretended that that was a code, but I was interested in codes because of my uncle.
I understand that you draw from your life almost entirely throughout your fiction.
You've lived on a houseboat.
I think most people do, don't you?
I think I did what most people do.
That's the first novels I wrote were taken more or less from things I've experienced.
And then after that, when you get to the end of your experience, or rather you get to the end of the things you want to write about, because some things you probably don't, well then you go outside it.
And that's what I did.
And there is a bookshop in your life, I understand.
As a matter of fact, I believe it's closed now, which is a great sadness to me.
It's at Southwold on the East Coast.
And it was haunted.
It really was.
It was, I don't know whether you are haunted.
There's a great difference between a ghost and a poltergeist.
Could you explain the difference for us, please?
Well, actually, I've seen a ghost, there is a ghost down there anyway, down in South Wales, of somebody who's, there's a crossing over the river, you know, a boat ferry, a rowboat ferry, and there's somebody who once missed the ferry, you know, you could see them waiting at the ferry sometimes.
Now, that's what I call a ghost, and you have to choose whether to believe in it or not, really.
But it's not necessarily even a frightening, it's a strange experience.
But a poltergeist is definitely malicious and evil, and there's a great deal of evidence for them.
There's whole books about them.
But, I mean, I've never thought about one at all in connection with the shop.
But it was run by a nice woman called Mrs. Neiman, and next door there was a shoe shop.
And one day I said to Mrs. Neiman, there's a terrible noise in the shoe shop.
I said, I thought it was shut, you know, Wednesday afternoon.
There's a terrible tapping and wrapping.
I've forgotten that people don't tap and wrap in shoe shops now.
That's only in Disney.
I mean, they don't mend shoes that way.
But, you know, and I thought it was, and she said, don't say anything, otherwise the customers will hear it, because she was, and, but I didn't, then another time when I was there, after I was offered the shop, it definitely made its appearance.
It made its appearance?
Well, I didn't, no, it didn't appear, because I don't think they ever do with poltergeist, but I, um,
They do something, because she didn't live over the shop, she lived across the river, but she had a room and everything you know about the shop.
And we had, I was sitting there with my little daughter and I heard the carpet being dragged about, you know, and books being thrown on the floor.
And I didn't go up there, but anyway, the next day I asked her, she went up and it was, the carpet was all up, you know, and the books.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
And they're supposed to make their appearance, they're often brought on, work with young girls, you know, tricks in between girls, you know, just turning from being a child after being grown up.
So perhaps it was, well anyway, so that was true.
So I brought this into the book just as it stood.
But making an artistic work out of it, that was the challenge, of course, making a novel, taking an experience of a bookstore, an experience with a poltergeist, and to actually fuse all of this into an artistic expression.
Yeah, well, I don't know how writing is done.
Do you write novels?
I write nonfiction.
I don't write novels.
But it is quite an alchemic process, isn't it, in a way?
And I guess the creative process is difficult to explain.
Yes, particularly for me, because I write with pen and ink.
I really think I'm the last writer in the world that does.
Pen and ink.
Yeah, pen and ink.
Nobody else, I bet you don't.
Is that a pencil?
Pen.
That's a pen.
I know, but I mean, you don't use a pencil.
A lot of writers who write with longhand, like Norman Mailer likes the number two pencil, for example.
Yeah, but then I'm sure he rushes through his computer, too.
But I don't.
And as a matter of fact, there's something to be said for writing in pen and ink, because I have sold all the manuscripts of Texas Humanities, and I would imagine— We've been there, actually.
I wrote about the HRC in a book that I wrote a couple of years ago.
Yeah, what did you say to write about them?
I wrote a book about bibliomania over 25 centuries, and of course this was one of the great cases of institutional, a very productive bibliomania, where they have assertively gone out and acquired wonderful archives such as yours.
Well, they've acquired all these humanities, but actually they're not taught at Texas, are they?
They're not taught at all, but it's a research.
No, but Texas doesn't have a department of the humanities, actually, in the university.
It did.
They had a liberal arts college.
I thought they got rid of the liberal arts.
Well, they absorbed it into a... Call it what you will.
Call it what you will.
But that's not for undergraduate use anyway.
It's to attract scholars like Michael Holroyd, for instance, who comes and researches a Shaw biographies there.
That was really intended to attract the international scholar and not to support the curriculum.
So I think it's irrelevant whether or not they teach these subjects there.
It's a very, very interesting place.
No, it's a moralist place.
I've been there, actually.
But they don't teach medicine, do they?
You have to go to Charleston for that.
Not Charleston, but maybe Houston, I think.
Houston, perhaps.
Anyway, where you wrote the book.
But anyway, they're very kind.
They have fun.
And they do, I think, there's a shortage in the world.
Well, it is interesting.
Have you ever tried—I notice you have a typewriter over here.
What's the process?
Do you go from pen and ink to the typewriter?
Oh, no, that's just the typing, you know, pieces of reviews and things.
When I've written it or I get somebody to type it out.
But, um, so, I mean, next door, my daughter's got all kinds of apparatus, but I've got them.
Have you ever tried a computer?
Yes, I've tried a word processor, but it doesn't correct in the way I want it to correct.
I feel I wasn't designed for a word processor, really.
I read also that you find writing to be an exceedingly arduous exercise, and you can quote it as saying you like having written, not so much the process of writing.
Yes, surely all writers feel that.
Perhaps they don't.
But, you know, if anything happens that you can, anything to disturb you, you can make an exclusion of the telephone rings.
It's such a relief, you know.
You can give it up for a bit and go and watch Doctor.
That's lovely.
No, I find it a very painful process.
The arts figure in your novels, in various degrees, poets,
drama students, young drama students.
There is a continuing interest in artistic expression in your work.
Is that by design, or is that just more or less what emerges from it?
Well, I suppose it certainly is what I'm interested in.
The drama students were really only stage children, which isn't quite as grand as that I did teach there.
I taught it.
So you're saying everything's from her life, isn't it?
That was, certainly.
And that is a school for young drama students?
Is that...
But they aren't drama students.
They were, they were, well, they did get parts, but they had the, always the knowledge that in a few years they probably wouldn't get in because very, very few child actors go on to be actors in their career now.
There's certainly great ones.
Sherry Temple didn't.
She failed.
Well, she does all sorts of things.
I mean, I think she's a senator, isn't she?
But she isn't an actress anymore.
I mean, it doesn't change.
Very rarely.
Mickey Rooney seems to be the only one to have passed from a child start.
Oh, yes, Mickey Rooney.
I remember, yes.
But it's very rare.
And they had child parts.
I mean, they'd come on as mice, you know, in the nutcracker suite.
But as soon as they got past a certain start,
It's quite a comment, don't you think, in the state of publishing today, where you are acknowledged to be one of the great—I don't mean to embarrass you—but acknowledged to be one of the great living novelists in the English language.
Oh, I don't know about that.
Well, I know the critics, Michael Derter and Richard Eater and all these wonderful people who have written these marvelous things about you.
And yet, in the United States, they publish your books in paperback.
Is that a comment, do you think, on the state of literary fiction today?
I don't know what it is at all in America.
I mean, here books have got expensive.
And I think the trouble is, I mean, normally speaking, most people anyway, they buy a book, they expect to read it once.
I mean, the novel, sorry.
Other kinds of books might be books of reference, but normally you probably expect to read once and not again.
You don't want to spend nearly 20 pounds on that.
And so the paperback markets are very vital.
I don't know about America, but do people buy hardbacks?
For serious fiction, it's problematic, isn't it?
It was an interesting strategy that they pursued here, and they do have now four of your books out in paper.
They're quite nice, I have to say.
Yeah, they are nice, yes.
I mean, I don't know.
I haven't been to America for years, but when I did Moscow, I found that the hardbacks were bought out at quite a high price.
But that very same day, you could get them reduced to about half.
This was in New York.
It's still that way.
You can buy books over the Internet now at 30 percent discount.
Yes.
So the prices aren't—well, you can't say.
They're not real, are they?
Well, I guess what I'm driving at is do you have any anxiety about the future of a literary novel?
Well, anxiety about the future of everything is a matter of fact.
But I mean, but anyway, certainly reading and books as a means of communicating.
Because I think children, for instance, who should, I mean, they used to be the great readers, but no, they aren't really, are they?
Because after all, they can watch it all.
We're meeting later today with Robert Tuber.
Do you know Robert Tuber?
I don't know.
He's an American writer in his 60s, and he is now pioneering this use of what they call interactive fiction, where you write a piece of work on a computer, and you invite the participation of the reader, of course because it's not a linear text anymore, it's what they call hypertext.
And so therefore the writer is not in control of the story, which really sounds kind of scary when you think about it.
I think that's a bad idea.
I think the readers ought to keep their place.
I really don't know.
I mean, the media do present an enormous problem, don't you?
It changes the whole dynamic of the creative process.
It does, yeah.
Do you have a sense of your fictional world?
Do all of your books form a corpus in your view?
Because they are drawn so clearly from your own personal experience, speaking particularly of the novels, do you think
that they can be seen as part of one larger work?
Well, no, I don't really.
You know?
Interesting.
I mean, the last one I wrote, as a matter of fact, was about late 18th century Germany.
It wasn't my own experience at all, you know.
But you also have a Russian novel, as a matter of fact.
Yes, yeah.
And you have an Italian novel.
So you have wandered a field in a number of interesting ways.
Yeah, but it is a great temptation, I think, for a novice to go to a country or to a pastime when there were much more strict rules of behavior and procedure.
And when there was a great danger, particularly for women, of breaking these rules, and it took great courage to do that.
That's not the case at the moment, aren't you?
But it makes the structure of the book much easier if there are things you can't do.
I'm just going to read to you a quotation from the Sunday New York Times review of the book that's up for a National Book Critics' Circle Award, the Bufau.
Quite astonishing book, a masterpiece, a great triumph, nothing short of dazzling.
one of the great novels about a writer.
So tell me a little bit about how you found this romantic poet in his early stages, and what about his life's suggestive novel?
Well, it's actually not a... It is about the early stages of his life, not the time when he got... Exactly.
...well-known, although... Right.
...put Manny into 29, I think.
But that started from the flower.
It's a... No, wait a moment, that's a lotus.
But there's a certain blue poppy.
Well, that's one that has been sold in the street, actually, for a hospital, you know.
But anyway, I've acquired these various blue flowers.
But this blue poppy comes from the, well, it's on the borders of India and Tibet.
And people do grow it over here.
It never looks quite right, but it is the most beautiful plant.
And I always wonder,
I was kind of thought about it.
This is actually very dull, but I can't... Anyway, I was... I'm very devoted to Lawrence, to D.H.
Lawrence.
And I was reading... It's really a short story.
It's called The Fox.
It's not quite that he wrote.
And at the end he...
He talks about the beautiful blue flower that's always beyond our grasp, and yet we can't have reaching out for it.
And I thought, well, how does Lawrence know it's blue?
I mean, I understand the image of it.
And I realized he was talking about this blue flower, this blue poppy.
And that led me on to the blue flower by this, well, we call him Novalis over here, but apparently it should be novelist.
So there's a difficulty about pronouncing him.
And I'd never read it before, actually.
So I knew it was a book that wasn't finished.
And then I got interested in him.
So Lawrence led you to this.
That's very interesting.
Yes.
Lawrence is very interested in plants and flowers, of course.
It was actually discovered by the inevitable English officer, you know, adventuring through those parts.
But anyway, I just, in his book, in his book, The Blue Fly, it's the untainable thing, you know, things everyone wants to grasp.
I thought I'd like to find out about him, but it was quite a business, actually, because our German is not very good.
And it took me a long time.
It's not translated, you know.
His letters certainly aren't.
You've got to read them in German.
So you read the works in the original German, and I understand you got these books at the London Library, is that right?
The London Library, yes.
Which we're going to tomorrow morning.
I got it out for...
Two years.
And they never asked.
They never sent her.
That's the London Library for you, you know.
I mean, I presume nobody was asking.
They would have written, but anyway.
We're going there tomorrow morning to see Alan Bell.
I'm writing a new book about book places and book people, and this is one of the great, great libraries, apparently.
Well, it is, but it was started by Carlisle.
But the rumor is that they're going to want to move.
I hope they don't.
That'll be terrible.
Well, I'll ask them tomorrow morning.
Well, I don't know what he'll say, but I suppose it has financial problems like everything else on Earth.
But just think of the movie and all those books.
It would be dreadful.
I think what I read is that they're looking to expand their space, not necessarily move.
I read that.
Well, I'm sure that's right.
I only had a rumor that they were going to move.
I don't think they could expand where they are.
But that's a wonderful kind of an institution where you can take out books and keep them indefinitely until somebody asks to see them.
Yes, I think they're having to tighten up their rules a bit.
And of course, they've had their computerizing their catalog.
But still, otherwise, it's the same in a London library.
So as you worked your way through translating these poems,
The poems are translated, but it's letters, yeah.
Did the elements of a novel start to suggest itself as you were doing?
Well, I couldn't really depart from the story of his family, and that's all in his letters, really.
So it's almost a kind of fictional biography in a way, isn't it?
Yes, I don't really know whether there ought to be such things, but yes, it is.
You've done different kinds of novels.
You've called them period pieces.
Do you try to do something different with each novel?
Is each novel a challenge in terms of form for you?
Well, I certainly feel differently about them, yes.
I feel I've got to have my
Title, first paragraph, and last paragraph before I start.
But it's apart from that.
So you have to know how it ends, then.
Yeah.
So it's not serendipity for you, so to speak, then, is it?
No, I can't use the ending.
I've got to have that first.
And that is interesting, because it's been said that I think you've only written one book with a happy ending.
Yes, I did make an effort about that.
I thought I must have had the ending, but I decided on that first.
Why do you suppose that is, then, if you know in advance the ending, that most of your work turns out?
Well, I mostly know it's going to have an unhappy ending.
I wonder why that is.
Well, all the whole thing's due, don't they?
I mean, it's something that doesn't.
But I think endings have been very much influenced by TV.
I mean, the TV, whether it's a bit of a serial, whether it's a complete play,
You notice that you're often really getting interested towards the end, and then the credits have to start rolling up.
You know, it's left, really.
It's neither one way or other.
And I think you can see the influence of that in the novel.
You were quoted once as saying that, I think one of your relatives said that you write a biography about someone that you love,
And you write a novel about someone you dislike.
Is that a fair assessment?
Is that what you were advised?
And have you followed that in your work?
Well, I certainly think it's a mistake to write a biography about somebody you hate.
I mean, people have attempted it, but I think it's wrong, you know.
I don't think you really hate all the people in the novel now.
I shouldn't have said that.
I don't think you said hate either.
I think you said dislike.
There's a degree.
Do you feel more comfortable with female, creating female characters, or your male characters?
Because they do seem different, other than the gender, of course, but they seem different.
Well, there's a certain sort of man I do like, you know, who's sort of what we used to call a decent man, you know, kind of quiet and he doesn't want to be worried too much, you know.
If you ask about what he thinks about somebody, he says, oh, he's all right, you know.
To be all right is quite sufficient.
And I think these people who tend to get the heavy end in life, you know, they're often not very successful, not very fortunate.
And they're life's losers, really.
I'm attracted to them.
I'm just going to briefly look at my notes here.
Does the critical response that you've used, has that been a surprise, a pleasant surprise to you?
When you started writing, I think you said it was because
had to do something to earn an income.
Did you anticipate that you would be shortlisted for the Booker, I think, three times winner, now shortlisted for the National Book Critics Circle Award in the States?
The critical approbation has been quite remarkable.
Is this something that you at all anticipated?
No, not at all.
And I was told, you know, I just don't know.
Perhaps that wasn't fair with you, but you start really from nothing, don't you?
All artists do, and at first you don't sell much, and then, I don't know, you're lucky that the game's ground.
I think the hard thing is the critics on the old, you know, those that...
It's a very curious thing that you pay more attention to those who dislike the books than those that like them.
I don't know why it is.
Do you agree with, when we look at the careers of writers, and especially when it covers most of their adult lives, you can almost see works that emerge that are just right for that point in their development.
And that book could not have been written at any other time, let's say, except when the writer was 40 or 35.
Does your work reflect where you were at this point in your life?
Had you started writing fiction in your 30s or your 40s, would it be an entirely different, do you think, body of work in terms of your outlook and your input and your perceptions?
No, really.
I had an aunt who wrote all her life for most novels.
And she finally had a really, well, a sort of nervous breakdown.
Anyway, she went to a nursing home.
But what she did is she turned on the lights after the nurses had gone and wrote a novel about the nursing home.
I mean, you know, she couldn't be stopped.
And she wrote the whole of her life.
I'd rather like to have done that.
I can't really answer that.
You had to answer.
I can't really answer your question.
When did you start writing?
Books in my forties.
Not right from when you were very young.
I've been a journalist all my life.
I've written for publication, but my first book was just published in 1995.
50, I guess, when that book came out, 51.
I really think you can start at any age.
But there is wisdom with years, I think.
Well, there should be.
I'm not sure that it is.
I've had my grandchildren.
Don't think so.
That's wonderful.
I love that.
So are you working on another novel now?
Well, I want to be.
That sort of question, I mean, I am...
I'm under contract for another one, but I can't say I've done it.
That's bad.
But, um... I don't feel hopeless.
I mean, I feel I'll write another one.
Do you feel... I don't even know if this will have anything to do with this piece, but it's a question I'm interested in.
Do you feel that completed work is completed work?
When Henry James, for instance,
went in to write the prefaces to the New York edition.
Yeah.
He found himself tinkering with novels that he'd written.
Yeah, he did tinkering, didn't he?
The words were at the same thing with his poetry.
Yes, I feel it's a pity that he altered the thing so much.
But we can't hope to be like Henry James, really and truly he is one of, wasn't he?
He's quite an extraordinary person.
There just isn't the scope now to be a Henry James.
Of course, people don't write these prefaces anymore, do they?
The prefaces are wonderful.
That's interesting.
They don't.
And yet he wasn't enormously successful financially in his lifetime, was he?
I don't believe so.
He needed family help, I believe.
And Wordsworth, of course, changed much for the worse.
I can't.
Yes, I'm afraid it was for the worse, yes.
Perhaps it's never a good idea to change, to sit with your own kind of changes.
Especially fiction.
I guess what I'm suggesting is that it does speak for a time in your development, in your artistic development.
For better or for worse, that's an expression of who you were at that point in your life.
I think that is true, but I mean, they're sort of great masters of the novel, I mean, Balzac, Dickens, they're writing a tremendous pitch right there, and they usually, in fact, probably as a serial, and then they've got to rush on to the next one, and then they die with one half finished, you know, I don't, I mean, novel writing is a strange business.
Now, you mentioned that you have
books all up to the spirit?
Yes, there are.
The ceiling is to give away.
There's a terrible char of that.
Can you tell us what you enjoy reading the most?
Do you read any contemporary novelists?
Well, I'm certainly going to when I start on the book, I'm just preparing to.
But for pleasure, I guess, I'm asking.
Well, I find it hard not to go back to the dear old favorites.
I think perhaps that's a sign of a second child.
No, it isn't.
I've always done that.
And they rest you like nothing else can.
The fact that you've read them dozens of times already.
In fact, sometimes I don't read the whole of them, but just scenes that I particularly like, you know.
Who in particular do you go to for pleasure?
You mean present-day writers?
No, I mean in the classics, who in particular do you find special pleasure?
You mentioned Dickens and Balzac again.
People don't read Dickens now, so perhaps they don't need to because he's forever on the TV, isn't he?
I'm very fond of Lawrence.
I think he's rather out of fashion, I don't know, I think so.
But when I taught, I used to teach Lawrence's novels.
You know, it was wonderful to see how these people, they're about 15 at the end, they really, really young him.
So particularly engaging with his writing, how the young readers... Yes, and I used to love teaching...
James Joyce's, not Ulysses, but The Portrait of the Artist.
And it's quite difficult, well, it gets difficult as it goes on, but they were prepared to undertake any difficulties, you know, because they felt it was true to growing up, the feeling of growing up.
I'm sorry, did you say when you start you have the first
the first sentence, the first paragraph, the last paragraph.
Do you have your title as well?
Yes, but the title depends on the publisher, and the publisher there depends very much on the sales force or whatever you... The marketing department.
The marketing department.
They know, they know exactly what novel title is going to, you know, appeal to the public.
So I've had them altered, you know, rather.
Could you give us a few examples of how
of titles that you have had that have been changed by publishers?
Well, there was one called The Gate of Angels, and it was about Cambridge in, you know, at the end of the, well, the beginning of the 20th century, really.
And I can't remember now what I did, I don't want to call it, but certainly all my titles were rejected, and The Gate of Angels was considered more attractive.
I think that's terrible that they change your titles.
They shouldn't change your titles.
Well, on the other hand, the sales force, the marketing departments are really the heroes of the whole book business, aren't they?
They're going on down to very obscure places, and they somehow make the shops accept, you know.
That's ten, and I suppose you have to take
take their word for it, really.
Well, they might have changed the title of Lomita, which you discuss in the book shot.
And I'm wondering, did that incident actually happen?
Yes, that did, yes, that it did, yes.
It's impossible to imagine now what a scandal that book calls, because it wouldn't, it's not, it doesn't seem scandalous now.
Well, they had a film that they were having trouble
distributing, however, based on Lolita, which I guess recently they haven't... I didn't know.
I didn't know there was a film in Lolita.
I thought there was a new version or something.
I read something that they're having problems with... Well, I suppose they might.
And yet you see that you can't really film Lolita, because you can't give the Atrobus who tells the story.
I mean, to understand them, you can't really do that with a film, can you?
But it really was a difficult title to... I wanted to call it something of unobservables, the importance of unobservables or something like that.
But they didn't like that at all.
They said it wouldn't go into the cover.
Of course it wouldn't.
So I was following something there where you start with the first paragraph and you know the final paragraph.
Do you also know the characters?
No, not really, no.
So they more or less have room to develop in the writing?
Yes, they do, but of course I do write rather short books, which is... You do, and I wonder if you could discuss that, actually.
Although the critics say they're just about the right length.
Well, perhaps they are of your critics, because they're about to get through in the week, but I'm just thinking of the Don Delino book, you know.
Oh, yeah, yes, yeah.
Oh, yeah, I mean, I can't remember what the length is, but it's... It's enormous.
Oh, the pinch-on is enormous.
The new pinch-on is enormous as well.
Yes, so that's the other extreme, and I think the American novel on the whole has been enormous.
I mean, the wolf there was enormous, and maybe Dickies is enormous.
Well, perhaps if you live in an enormous country, you do quite enormous novels.
Did you have anything that you asked us to find?
I mean, the troops had a blue poppy.
I've never seen it.
Have you seen a blue poppy?
Were you inspired to go find one?
A blue poppy?
The blue poppy.
Well, you see, they were brought over here by this, I can't remember what date.
It was just before the First World War, this, you know, English officer.
And they grow, a lot of people do grow them, so I've often seen them growing over here, but they don't look right.
I was trying to imagine what it would look like because they have such beautiful, the orange, the red poppies, whatever.
Well, I can't tell you that they, they've got them in a queue.
Somebody told me that you should see them from below because they grow on the foothills, you know.
They don't really take here.
After a year or two, they die whilst they transmute in some way, you know.
Well, they do change.
They change a bit.
Yeah, and it's so that in a way they've succeeded.
You know, they're trying to get started, but they don't.
But I've never been to this.
I've never been to this foothills, you know, of Tibet.
I've never seen them go.
I should do.
Any other foreign countries that you're interested in writing about now?
Well, I don't know, really.
I don't feel they're foreign when I'm writing about them.
That's funny.
I'm not able to answer hearty questions.
I'm sorry.
I'm certainly interested in your experience with the BBC as well.
What did you do with the BBC?
Well, I was very, very junior.
Really, we had then these discs, they were called records.
They were 75.
We didn't use many tapes in the war.
They were like this.
They were very heavy.
They were cut with wax, and you could scrape the wax off and re-wax them and use them again.
They would have things like churches, speeches or something on that needed various programs.
And we really just toiled about the building bringing these records, often the wrong ones.
You can imagine the difficulty for the programs.
And there was a very strict unionization in the BBC then.
I mean, we weren't allowed to touch any of the equipment unless you belonged to the electrician's union.
I don't know whether they could take them off.
I don't think so.
I like that now.
But anyway, so that's what we were.
I think we were called Recorded Programme Assistants.
Recorded Programme Assistants, RPH, that's right.
But everything was on shift, you know, in the BBC.
It had to be during the war.
I was curious, I mean, it still looks much the same in Broadcasting House.
I mean, the things were very good quality and all the lino and things, just the same.
Well, the BBC has always been regarded as the best, and it still is.
Well, yes, I think they're in trouble now, but everything is in trouble.
I don't want to take up too much of your time.
And you lived on a houseboat.
Yes.
Well, a houseboat isn't really what it was.
It was a sailing barge.
And that's to say it had been.
It was about a hundred years old.
And it had been.
It had a very honorable career.
It still had the mast, you know.
They say you can run them with just a man and a boy.
And they were coast-wise traffic.
You know, they took things to and fro.
An enormous hold.
You ditch sheep or coal or anything.
And...
So that she wasn't a houseboat sounds rather frivolous, but she wasn't really a frivolous craft.
The only trouble was that she did leak most terribly.
I mean, she'd really come to the end of her life.
But the title, it does become a question, does this houseboat become a metaphor for you?
Do you think metaphorically in terms of these experiences?
Well, I suppose it was a metaphor, but it did actually sink, you know.
That's what's wonderful.
We had to be taken off by the inner police.
That's wonderful.
I guess that's where we readers see the metaphoric influences, but you're recording it as you recall it, and that's the way it works into, and if it becomes a metaphoric
Yes, I don't know which way around it is, but they were very cheap.
They were a pound a week.
You couldn't get much cheaper than that.
And I think they're still there, but I think they've all been done over.
You know, they're all more smartened up now.
And you do come from a family of clergymen, I understand, and this experience, would you say that this experience does influence the body of your work?
I think the fact that most of them did all this writing, you know, the idea of writing being a natural activity, rather like eating, that came from my family.
And it sounds like you've had a totally fascinating family, though.
And every one had something, elements that you've been... Well, yes, they're all dead now.
Still, I shouldn't complain.
Complain?
I mean, I'm here with my grandchildren.
And how many grandchildren do you have?
Well, there's three in this house.
I've got nine altogether.
Really?
But in this house, there's three.
And you have three children, I understand.
Yes, I've got three children, yes.
That's the way it goes, you see.
We have three children and nine grandchildren.
I mean, no wonder the world is, I don't know.
I think that we have a lot.
Do you mind if I take a few photographs of you?
No, shall I put the light on?
It's going to be dark, isn't it?
Okay, let me put a little bit of light in there.
I'd love to get a picture made with the books.
Where do you normally sit to do that?
Well, most women don't really sit anywhere, and then sometimes at the copyrights are, you know.
You have said, by the way, that's another thing, that it's a lot harder for women to write, isn't it, than... Well, I think they do it in a different way.
I mean, they're all kitchen table writers, I think, you know, because there's something you always have to do.
Maybe I can get a picture of it to my wife and Ms.
Sterling together.
All right, yes, certainly.
I love the books.
Do you like that?
No, but I'm not sure what that is.
I don't think you should be standing in the background.
Thank you.
Now I'm going to get a picture made with the books.
You can just sit right there.
It's almost how I'm tiny.
Pictures are bummed with you.
Why don't you come here?
Maybe, could you perhaps sit in this chair right here?
Oh, good, yeah.
Thank you.
And then I could get a picture with the books in the background, and I do love the books, and I could get the outside, too.
Oh, that's nice.
That's very nice.
I'm going to come in just a little bit closer, if that's OK.
I always blink when I have it.
Other people don't seem to.
I don't know how they manage to avoid it.
Well, I'm going to try this one, which is, it'll flash twice.
Oh, no.
And that way, if you do blink, it'll
That's supposed to take the red out of your eyes.
Well, I have noticed the red, yes.
They just had a very nice photo of you first.
And we have some wonderful photographs that they have since, by the way, that really do.
I'll be by, um, oh, yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Your own sweater.
And I don't know if you had your arm, any final arm with it.
The one that you took of you that we had?
Oh, yes, sir.
Do you remember who took that?
I think there was a publicity photo.
She's a well-known photographer, but I can't... My memory is fading me.
Could you kindly look at Tina for anything?
It's been very nice.
What a wonderful feel, but we're still kind of in the midst of a winter.
We were snowing when we left.
Oh, was it?
Terrible, yes.
The damatils have just failed this year.
Yeah, but I think it was too warm with the long voice.
Near Worcester, the city of Worcester.
It has been a very mild winter, too.
I just want to get a long shot.
We have about 22 newspapers that I'm writing this particular article for.
Are you syndicated there?
Yes.
And you always are, are you?
Basically, we work together and have syndicated.
This is the boss of the operation.
This is a nice picture.
I like this a lot.
We also do children's book reviews, and she does the children's book reviews.
We do this out of conviction, because we do love
What was that?
I don't think they can really make that an income problem.
No.
It's fine if you can attack it and do other things.
Yeah.
But, um... ...syndicated, and I don't think you can get to the magazine syndicated unless you have a lot of experience.
Yeah, no, I don't know when that's done.
And people that are usually up there, when they reach back, it seems like they have all these good experiences.
They don't want to do the truth.
And so we do a major feature and a major author once a week.
And we do the children's books once a month.
And then I also write a column for a magazine once a month.
It's a book magazine for bibliophiles.
We couldn't leave here yesterday until I filed this 2,000-word story.
And I finished it for 45 minutes before the bus came to pick us up.
It's difficult, isn't it?
It's very difficult.
We have to walk down to a place called The Flask, which I think is down here.
I passed it.
I don't know if you go down into the flask.
I mean, this way uphill is up to Hyggett Village.
I see.
If you turn... Go up this way.
Yeah.
Well, you can see it's going uphill.
Okay.
Down.
Well, it goes down into London, really.
That way it goes into London.
Yes, it does.
And this way we go to the flask.
You notice that that's...
This other gentleman lives in North London, too, so we're going to meet him over.
But will the flask be open?
Uh, he said it would.
Well, he'll hear what he knows, you know, because they, um... He'll be there, I'm sure.
I'm sure he must know.
Obviously, he goes to flask frequently.
There'd better be a good place to talk.
There is a flask in Hampstead, definitely.
But you definitely hide it.
He said five blocks from where we would be here.
And we passed it on the taxi track.
My wife saw it.
Did you come over the top in the taxi?
Yes.
Ah, yes.
Well, then he would pass the track.
You must have been down.
We came up this way and down here.
Yeah, that's right.
Well, I'll be happy to send you a part of this piece here.
I have your address, so I have your postal address.
Thank you.
Well, thank you so much, Jim.
We have a lot of famous papers, the Philadelphia Inquirer will be using this story, and the Cleveland, Ohio paper, and the papers of the West Coast.
They have a lot of that.
It's quite nice.
I was about to ask if there was a cat.
Well, yesterday he guessed, and you know what you didn't know when you see Mary.
What's the thing I'm talking about?
Well, not really.
I guess, you know, we're on the head of it.
Yes, you do.
And then you just hit a little bit next to the top of your feet and then go on up.
The double will go on up and get down.
I'm just going to get down here up to George because I think it's just kind of nice too.
If you don't mind.
No, I don't mind, no.
This is kind of nice with the brick.
May I take one more?
Thank you.
There you go.
I'll get Eddie.
No, no, he's all right.
Thank you.
Come on, Eddie.
Well, I just decided you to... Right over here.
Thank you, Mrs. Fitzgerald.
Thank you.
What do I have?
That's a good show.
Good question.
I've been done a thousand of the times.
Huh?
What's going on?
What do you think about that?
I don't know.